---
layout: post
title: 'Hula Hoops and Tomographs'
tags: [projects]
accent_image: /img/bg_hula2.png
accent_color: '#A85641'
---

Last year, I came across this artwork by [Petros Vrellis](http://artof01.com/vrellis/works/knit.html) called "A New Way to Knit". It consists of a circular frame or loom with pins on the rim. A single string is wound around the pins and across the frame to produce a black-and-white representation of an image.
If you watch the video, you might think (I surely did) that this is the work of a fantastic savant who can somehow think in advance where the string has to go in order to recreate an image. When I stumbled on the video the second time I was sufficiently intrigued and did some research.


Vrellis uses the help of a computer and an insane amount of patience to create these images, as he tells [on his website](http://artof01.com/vrellis/works/knit.html). The algorithm involved [as described here](https://hackaday.com/2016/07/28/computer-designed-portraits-knit-by-hand/) is brute force: Given an image as an input, it iterates through all possible lines to find the next position of the string. For a circular arrangement of $$ N $$ pins overlaid over an input image, the algorithm works as follows:
* Step 1: Pick a starting pin at random or use the last used one as a starting point
* Step 2: Look at the subset of the $$ N-1 $$ pins that is further than a previously defined distance $$ d $$ from the current pin
* Step 3: Sum up the amount of "blackness" traced by the individual lines connecting the possible pins to the current pin. Choose the pin with the line covering the most total blackness as the next starting pin
* Step 4: For all of the pixels in the line, brighten up the corresponding pixels of the original image by a fixed amount
* Step 5: Repeat until a given number of lines is reached

The output of this algorithm is a list of pins, which tells you how to wind the thread along the frame. This reminds me of a weird reversed [tomogram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomography), in the sense that one tries to find matching 1D lines to reproduce a given 2D image instead of trying to infer a 2D image from signal values of 1D rays crossing a target.

Given this list of pins, the real manual work starts. You might (with some practice) average one line every 3 seconds on your loom. For 4000 lines, this puts the work needed to finish the artwork above 3 hours already. However, you will have to take breaks as the work is very tedious. As I couldn't find a circular loom for sale, I used a wooden hula-hoop ring and hammered ~200 nails into it. This resulted in some slippage of the thread in some cases, but all in all worked better than expected.
I used the TTS built into macOS to export the list of pins into an audio file: 
~~~shell
cat points.txt | say -o out.aiff
~~~
I inserted the command
~~~shell
[[slnc 3500]]
~~~
after every line in the file `points.txt`. This will cause the TTS engine to pause for 3.5 seconds after each number.
I then numbered the pins on the ring and had my laptop read me the numbers out loud. When I made a mistake, I had to rewind the audio and track back to the point where I made the mistake. All in all, this took much longer than the theoretical amount of time needed because of both making a lot of mistakes and my arm getting sore after a while.

I uploaded the python code on github $LINK, it accepts a square image as an input and produces a list of points and a preview image of the line art as an output.
